# DISCUSSION

### 1.1.	The interaction energies correspond to the likelihood of viable and stable interactions between sRNA-mRNA pairs
sRNAs are known to bind to mRNAs to post-trascriptomically regulate their function. Their role can be considered similar to the eukaryotic miRNAs or can be considered functionally analogous to them [15]. Negative interaction energies between sRNA-mRNA pairs are more stable, indicating a higher likelihood of effective sRNA-mediated gene regulation. The negative interaction energies are known to be more favorable for RNA-RNA interactions. In the context of RIBlast [14], the outputs for interaction energies are the sum of Accessibility energy and Hybridization energy. Accessibility energies are favorable when they are lower since low accessibility energies form the desired intermolecular base-pairs, on other hand, high accessibility energies form intramolecular base-pairs. The hybridization energy is also calculated as the mean of stacking energies and loop energies both energies having antagonistic effects on one another as the former is stabilizing whereas the latter is destabilizing [14]. 
A stringent cut-off value ensures that the outputs have maximum interaction potential. Negative values obtained for interaction energies corresponding to values <-27 are more likely to display significant sRNA-mRNA regulation [13]. 
### 1.2.	Potential of sRNA sraB’s role in Ecoli yceF regulation
The sRNA sraB is found in bacteria such as Escherichia coli, Salmonella enterica serovar enteritidis, Shigella dysenteriae, etc where it is said to have a speculative role in the regulation of viral resistance [16]. Other studies have shown significant impact of sraB in differential expression of proteins mainly pertaining to the Krebs cycle. In Shigella, it was found to have been responsible for downregulation of virulence [17]. An NMR spectroscopy study on Ecoli ProQ showed that SraB masks potential trypsin cleavage sites within the linker region of ProQ [18]. The mRNA locus tag ECs_1465 corresponds to the yceF gene which is associated with Nucleoside triphosphate pyrophosphatase that hydrolyzes 7-methyl-GTP (m7GTP). It may also possess a dual role in cell division arrest and in preventing the incorporation of modified nucleotides into cellular nucleic acids. The GO annotations of this gene reveal its involvement in hydrolase activity and nucleotide metabolic processes. Therefore, It is probable that the sraB could have a putative role in yceF regulation [19]. 
### 1.3.	sRNA sequences may lie within its target mRNA sequence indicating overlap/interaction; possibly playing a regulatory role in Helicobacter pylori
The mRNA target J5D21_RS00670 displayed viable interaction energies with multiple sRNAs such as HPnc0470, HPnc0480 and HPnc0490 having interaction values at -205.704kcal/mol, -143.359kcal/mol and -54.8902kcal/mol respectively. These sRNAs obtained from Cynthia et al were found in the positive strand, and their TSS was very close to each other as well as lay within the loci of J5D21_RS00670 [20],[21]. Not much is mentioned about their antisense strands or function therefore it is hard to determine whether they might have a regulatory role on J5D21_RS00670 which codes for LutB/LldF family L-lactate oxidation iron-sulfur protein.

sRNA HPnc0580 shows viable interaction energy with cheZ mRNA target at -136.032kcal/mol. HPnc0580 is present in the positive strand at TSS 170022 [20]. The cheZ plays an important role in bacterial chemotaxis signal transduction pathway by accelerating the dephosphorylation of phosphorylated CheY (CheY-P). Dephosphorylates also CheV2 but not CheV1 or CheV3 [22] it also forms a distinct chemotaxis regulatory complex with ChePep independently of the core chemotaxis signaling proteins [23]. From the locus of J5D21_RS00820 (cheZ) which is at 169999-170730 within the genome [24], it can be safe to conclude that this putative sRNA probably lies somewhere within the domain of the target mRNA and may play a role in its regulation. 

The sRNA HPnc2260 is located in the positive strand having a TSS at 516627, antisense to HP0490 (discontinued on 23-Mar-2020) [20], [25]. It shows promising interaction with mRNA target J5D21_RS02475 at an interaction energy of -233.828kcal/mol. J5D21_RS02475 which is associated with CagY family CD-EC repeat-containing protein. The locus of this mRNA target is at 516737-522445 indicating the same inference that the sRNA sequence might lie within the target. 

sRNA HPnc2420 was shown to interact with J5D21_RS02550 (type IV secretion system chaperone CagF) at an interaction energy of -73.345kcal/mol. sRNA HPnc2420 was found in the negative strand at a TSS locus of 537624 [20], whereas the loci of the target mRNA was found to be 536998-537804 [26]. 

Similar patterns of overlap between the sRNA and mRNA targets are found in the case of mRNA J5D21_RS04480 and sRNAs HPnc4610, HPnc4620 and HPnc4630 interaction. In this case, three sRNAs seem to be possessing viable interaction energies with mRNA target J5D21_RS04480 (associated with MFS transporter) having loci from 967870-969252 [27]. The three sRNAs in question are present in the positive strand at TSS 968583, 968980 and 968990 respectively [20]. 

The sRNAs HPnc5130 and HPnc5140 interact with the mRNA J5D21_RS04855 at -126.558kcal/mol and -107 kcal/mol respectively. The mRNA is associated with the gene hpaA which is associated with an external encapsulating structure in the outer membrane[28], [29].  HpaA is an outer membrane protein of Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) that plays a significant role in the adhesion to the human stomach. The functional relation between HpaA and gastric epithelial cells is still not clear. However, it has been proposed that HpaA may be involved in the biological process of regulation of transcription and nucleic acid metabolism during the adhesion of H. pylori to human gastric epithelial cells[30].

The sRNA HPnc5490 interacts with J5D21_RS05145 at -74.2428 kcal/mol. The mRNA is associated with the gene hcpC which, as associated with a hydrolase activity i.e beta-lactamase activity ,  has a response to antibiotics and is active in the extracellular region[31-35].  HcpC is a member of the Helicobacter cysteine-rich proteins (Hcp) family, which is a large family of secreted proteins that seem to be specific for microorganisms from the epsilon-subfamily of proteobacteria. Although significantly elevated levels of anti-Hcp antibodies were observed in many patients infected with H. pylori, details on the biological functions of Hcp proteins are sparse[32], [36].

The sRNA HPnc6670 interacts with J5D21_RS07785 and J5D21_RS06110 at -46.4379 kcal/mol and -53.4647 kcal/mol respectively. The mRNA J5D21_RS07785 is associated with the protein Anthranilate synthase which is an enzyme that catalyzes the chemical reaction of chorismate and L-glutamine to produce anthranilate, pyruvate, and L-glutamate . Anthranilate synthase creates anthranilate, an important intermediate in the biosynthesis of indole and, by extension, the amino acid tryptophan. Tryptophan can then be metabolized further into serotonin, melatonin, or various auxins[37]. The mRNA J5D21_RS06110 is associated with Glycosyltransferases (GTs) which are enzymes that establish natural glycosidic linkages. They catalyze the transfer of saccharide moieties from an activated nucleotide sugar (also known as the "glycosyl donor") to a nucleophilic glycosyl acceptor molecule . The nucleophile of the acceptor molecule can be oxygen-, carbon-, nitrogen-, or sulfur-based [38]. Glycosyltransferases can transfer saccharide moieties to a variety of acceptor molecules, including sugars, lipids, proteins, nucleic acids, antibiotics and other small molecules [39]. It is also seen from the TSS position of the sRNA (1307963 in negative strand) and the loci of the two mRNA targets- 1307762-1307908 in J5D21_RS07785 and 1307862-1308920) any possible overlap in sRNA-mRNA can exist with the latter mRNA target.  

The sRNA HPnc6910 interacts with the mRNA J5D21_RS06595 at -103.387kcal/mol. The mRNA is associated with DEAD/DEAH box helicases which are a large family of conserved RNA-binding proteins that belong to the broader group of cellular DExD/H helicases . Members of the DEAD-box helicase family have roles throughout cellular RNA metabolism from biogenesis to decay[40] . They are highly conserved in nine motifs and can be found in most prokaryotes and eukaryotes . These motifs mediate ATP binding and hydrolysis, RNA binding, and ATP-dependent intramolecular RNA remodeling[41–44]

The sRNAs HPnc7300 and HPnc7310 interact with the mRNA J5D21_RS06885 at -53.4513 kcal/mol and -36.35 kcal/mol respectively.  The mRNA codes for rRNA pseudouridine synthase which is an enzyme that catalyzes the isomerization of specific uridine residues within an RNA chain to produce pseudouridine [45]. Pseudouridine is a modified nucleoside that is present in a wide range of cellular RNAs and is highly conserved across species . In rRNA, pseudouridine has been shown to fine-tune and stabilize the regional structure and help maintain its functions in mRNA decoding, ribosome assembly, processing, and translation [46].

The sRNA HPnc7830 interacts with the mRNA J5D21_RS07195 at -174.481 kcal/mol. This mRNA is associated with the gene recG which is associated with a critical role in recombination and DNA repair. Helps process Holliday junction intermediates to mature products by catalyzing branch migration. Has a DNA unwinding activity characteristic of a DNA helicase with a 3'- to 5'- polarity. Unwinds branched duplex DNA (Y-DNA) (By similarity)[31],[47-50].
### 1.4.	Possible existence of putative regulation network mediated by HPnc2630 and HPnc2640 on ribose 5-phosphate isomerase B and site-2 protease family protein
The mRNA target J5D21_RS02710 which is associated with rpiB gene(ribose 5-phosphate isomerase B) showed viable interactions with two different sRNAs namely, HPnc2630 and HPnc2640 respectively both lying in the negative strand. On observing the TSS of both the sRNAs and the loci of the mRNA target (567965-568426) [51], it is observed that these sRNA-mRNA target pairs lie close to each other but may not have any overlap between them. 

The same pair of sRNAs were shown to interact with another mRNA target J5D21_RS02715 at interaction energies -65.302kcal/mol and -84.7642kcal/mol respectively. The mRNA target is associated with site-2 protease family protein and may show overlap with the sRNA sequences since its loci is at 568447-569145 [52]. These interactions might indicate a cascade of interaction and regulation networks mediated by two sRNAs in conjunction over the two mRNAs in question. 

### 1.5.	sRNAs with different interaction potentials with the same mRNA target in Helicobacter pylori
In the case of sRNA-mRNa interaction between sRNA HPnc3560 and mRNA J5D21_RS03480, we noticed two different interaction energies for the same pair. These interaction energies were -117.217kcal/mol and -51.867kcal/mol. Similar pattern was observed in the case of sRNA HPnc6870 and mRNA J5D21_RS06480 having two interaction energies -126.581kcal/mol and -108.394kcal/mol. This implies that the sRNA-mRNA interaction could occur in multiple conformations or with different stabilities or that the sRNA and mRNA form alternative binding conformations or have different binding strengths due to differences in the local RNA structure or other factors. It is to be noted that RIBlast outputs are predictive and that further experimental validation will be required.   

### 1.6.	The putative role of F6 in DUF4097 domain-containing protein regulation in Streptococcus is not related to previously known chaperone regulation in Mycobacterium
The interaction energy between F6 and mRNA with locus tag SPNHU17_RS00700 at -53.291kcal seems viable for stable intermolecular binding. It has been previously demonstrated that the sRNA F6 on deletion, leads to dysregulation of chaperones GroEL2 and GroES in Mycobacterium tuberculosis [53]. From pairwise alignment of SPNHU17_RS00700 with the GroEL2 and GroES genes, not much significant similarity hence any potential interaction is not due to structural homology but a characteristic unique to the organism.  

### 1.7.	Putative sRNA regulations in Streptococci 
The F7 sRNA is found to be significantly impaired in Streptococcus pneumoniae [54]. The target mRNA SPNHU17_RS01095 with which we observed a very viable interaction energy -90.5739kcal/mol is said to code for protein from MccC family protein. Its GO terms are associated with hydrolase activity but not much is known about mRNA locus or the protein function. The sRNA F23 and mRNA target SPNHU17_RS05960 have interaction values very close to the cutoff value at -27.0493kcal/mol. From previous studies, the existence of this sRNA is not firmly established because in one study led by Mann et al, it was found in TIGR4 strains [54] however, another study led by Sinha et al did not find the existence of F23 in TIGR4 or D39W strains even though their serotypes in the DNA was present [55]. Since not much confirmed about the presence and interaction, not much can be concluded for the above interactions obtained. 

The interaction energy between sRNA F43 and gene topA is at -77.3132kcal/mol. The topA gene is associated with DNA binding activity, mainly isomerase activity and catalysis of a DNA topological transformation by transiently cleaving one DNA strand at a time to allow passage of another strand; it changes the linking number by +1 per catalytic cycle [56]. Although there are no known polar effects of sRNA F43 on flanking genes identified as of yet [54]. There may still be a possibility of F43 regulation on topA as indicated by the interaction values obtained. Similar to F43, sRNA F44 is also not known to have any polar effects on flanking genes identified so far [54]. The mRNA target interaction of -81.79kcal/mol with SPNHU17_RS06080 hints at potential to regulate the DNA processing protein DprA. The DprA is associated with a lot of functions such as Favors the loading of RecA onto ssDNA and formation of RecA-DNA filaments, triggering RecA-catalysis of ATP-driven homologous DNA pairing [34], DNA transformation [57],[58] and is thought to interact at the cell pole with newly imported transforming ssDNA which it binds cooperatively, protecting linear and circular ssDNA from nuclease action [59]. Due to lack of evidence of any function of sRNA F44, and the viable interaction energy outputs found between the two, any regulatory effect between F44 and SPNHU17_RS06080 is purely speculative in nature. 

sRNA F45 interacts with mRNA target SPNHU17_RS07080 with an energy of -59.2367kcal/mol. Not much is known about the function of sRNA F45, or the SPNHU17_RS07080 mRNA is said to code for Elongation factor tu. Similarly, not much can be concluded with complete confidence for the sRNA-mRNA interactions between F54 and SPNHU17_RS07155 (coding for ABC transporter substrate-binding protein-glutamine transport) at -192.669kcal/mol, F46 and SPNHU17_RS07300 (coding for Polysaccharide biosynthesis protein, putative) at -46.3968kcal/mol. 

The interaction between the sRNA R15 and the mRNA with the locus tag SPNHU17_RS06055 at -103.961 kcal/mol. The sRNA R15 is said to be associated with the Pyr family [54].This mRNA is responsible for the translation of the protein CutC which is associated with copper homeostasis and involved in uptake and delivery. CutC is a member of the Cut family and is suggested to be involved in efflux trafficking of cuprous ions[60].
The interaction between the sRNA R2 and the mRNA with the locus tag SPNHU17_RS06090 at -86.8654 kcal/mol. This mRNA is responsible for the translation of the protein DMT family transporter which is part of the drug/metabolite transporter (DMT) superfamily. This superfamily is a large group of membrane transporters found in eukaryotes, bacteria and archaea. It includes exporters for a remarkably wide range of substrates, such as toxic compounds and metabolites[61]. The DMT clan comprises transporter proteins that have a remarkably wide substrate range, from proteins that transport nucleotide-sugar conjugates in the Golgi apparatus (SLC35), to metal ion transporters (SLC30, SLC39) and bacterial proteins that transport toxins, such as camphor, chloroquine, or ethidium bromide[62].

The interaction of sRNAs R4 and F65 with the mRNA SPNHU17_RS06750 have the interaction energy of 53.192 kcal/mol and 53.9496kcal/mol respectively. The mRNA is responsible for the translation of the ABC transporter substrate-binding protein which constitutes a ubiquitous superfamily of integral membrane proteins that are responsible for the ATP-powered translocation of many substrates across membranes. For prokaryotic ABC transporters that function as importers, substrate translocation is also dependent on another protein component, a high-affinity binding protein that specifically associates with the ligand in the periplasm for delivery to the appropriate ABC transporter [63].

The interaction between the sRNA R18 and the mRNA with the locus tag SPNHU17_RS06835 at -107.975 kcal/mol. The mRNA is associated with the gene lgt which is found in plasma membrane associates with transferase activity i.e. catalytic activity on a phosphatidylglycerol-prolipoprotein diacylglyceryl transferase , involved in lipoprotein biosynthetic process[64]. 

The interaction between the sRNA F55 and the mRNA associated with the locus tag of SPNHU17_RS08500 yields the interaction energy of -91.6271 kcal/mol. The mRNA is associated with NUDIX hydrolases which are a superfamily of hydrolytic enzymes capable of cleaving nucleoside diphosphates linked to any moiety[65–68]. The reaction yields nucleoside monophosphate (NMP) plus X-P [65]. Substrates hydrolyzed by NUDIX enzymes comprise a wide range of organic pyrophosphates, including nucleoside di- and triphosphates, dinucleoside and diphosphoinositol polyphosphates, nucleotide sugars and RNA caps, with varying degrees of substrate specificity. In general, the role of NUDIX hydrolases is to sanitize the nucleotide pools and to maintain cell viability, thereby serving as surveillance and "house-cleaning" enzymes [69].
The interaction between the sRNA R21 and the mRNA associated with the locus tag of SPNHU17_RS07350 at -56.3009 kcal/mol. This mRNA translates to a bifunctional Cof-type HAD-IIB family hydrolase/peptidylprolyl isomerase is a protein that has two functions. The first function is as a Cof-type HAD-IIB family hydrolase, which is a type of dehalogenase enzyme that can participate in the catabolism of halogenated organic acids [70]. The second function is as a peptidylprolyl isomerase, which catalyzes the cis-trans isomerization of peptide bonds.
The interaction between sRNAs R6 and R12 with SPNHU17_RS8705 with the interaction energy of -137.107 kcal/mol and -330.319 kcal/mol. Not much is known about the sRNA R6 apart from its putative association with T-box family, previous studies by Mann et al demonstrated sRNA R12’s lack of significance in virulence [54]. This mRNA code for the LacI family of proteins consists of transcriptional regulators related to the lac repressor[71]. The lac repressor is a DNA-binding protein that inhibits the expression of genes coding for proteins involved in the metabolism of lactose in bacteria. These genes are repressed when lactose is not available to the cell, ensuring that the bacterium only invests energy in the production of machinery necessary for uptake and utilization of lactose when lactose is present [72]. When lactose becomes available, it is converted into allolactose which binds to the lac repressor, causing an allosteric change in its shape. In its changed state, the lac repressor is unable to bind tightly to its cognate operator. Thus, the gene is mostly off in the absence of an inducer and mostly on in the presence of an inducer [72], [73].

The interaction between sRNA R7 with mRNA SPNHU17_RS09010 requires -56.1408 kcal/mol interaction energy. The mRNA codes for ABC transporter permease which belong to a ubiquitous superfamily of integral membrane proteins that are responsible for the ATP-powered translocation of many substrates across membranes [74]–[76]. ABC transporters often consist of multiple subunits, one or two of which are transmembrane proteins and one or two of which are membrane-associated ATPases [77]. The transmembrane proteins, also known as permeases, protect hydrophilic substrates from the lipids of the membrane bilayer thus providing a pathway across the cell membrane . In prokaryotes, importers mediate the uptake of nutrients into the cell [78].

The interaction between sRNA R9 with mRNA SPNHU17_RS09615 requires -48.3766 kcal/mol interaction energy. The mRNA codes for FtsX-like permease family protein which belongs to  a family of predicted permeases and hypothetical transmembrane proteins. Buchnera aphidicola LolC has been shown to transport lipids targeted to the outer membrane across the inner membrane. Both LolC and Streptococcus cristatus TptD have been shown to require ATP. This region contains three transmembrane helices[79],[80].

The interaction between sRNA F49 with mRNA SPNHU17_RS10220 requires -46.5657 kcal/mol. The mRNA is associated with the gene ilvD  which is associated with lyase activity and functions in the biosynthesis of branched-chain amino acids. Catalyzes the dehydration of (2R,3R)-2,3-dihydroxy-3-methylpentanoate (2,3-dihydroxy-3-methylvalerate) into 2-oxo-3-methylpentanoate (2-oxo-3-methylvalerate) and of (2R)-2,3-dihydroxy-3-methylbutanoate (2,3-dihydroxyisovalerate) into 2-oxo-3-methylbutanoate (2-oxoisovalerate), the penultimate precursor to L-isoleucine and L-valine, respectively [81].



### 1.8.	The putative role of F48 in xerD regulation is not related to previously known 20 fold upregulation in Streptococcus gene sp1872
The sRNA F48 and xerD interaction energy is at -117.194kcal/mol. The sRNA F48 is said to lead to up to 20 fold upregulation in upstream gene sp1872 (discontinued as of May 2015) [82], [83]. There was no significant similarity or alignment observed between SPNHU17_RS08950 (xerD) and sp1872 ruling out the possibility of functional and structural homology. Thus it cannot be concluded with certainty if similar regulation will be in the case of xerD. However, as it is confirmed to have a regulatory role and from the interaction energies obtained, there could be a possibility for putative site-specific tyrosine recombinase (xerD) regulation. 

### 1.9.	ItrA shows viable interaction energies with three different sRNA
mRNA SPNHU17_RS10465 shows very viable interactions with three sRNAs F50, F66 and F67 with interaction energies of -89.8282kcal/mol, -197.838kcal/mol and -91.1014kcal/mol. mRNA SPNHU17_RS10465 shows catalytic activity and is associated with RNA binding, 	RNA-directed DNA polymerase activity and defense response to virus. [84]
### 1.10.	sRNA isrG mediated mRNA regulatory pathways may be diverse in function in Salmonella 
The existence of multiple mRNA targets for isrG suggests that the sRNA may be capable of targeting multiple genes in the organism of interest, which in this case was Salmonella typhimurium. The presence of different interaction energies for same sRNA-mRNA targets i.e. isrG-STM2588 and isrG-STM1049 suggest that these sRNA-mRNA interactions could possibly occur in multiple conformations or with different stabilities. One hypothesis can be that the sRNA and mRNA have distinct binding conformations or binding strengths as a result of variations in the local RNA structure or other factors. Another possibility is that the interaction energy calculations are too crude to differentiate between the two potential interactions. It should be noted that RIBlast is a prediction tool, and the interaction energies it estimates are calculations based on sequence complementarity and other factors. 

Functional annotation of the three mRNAs on the basis of Locus_tag revealed a singular cluster at medium stringency; in DAVID each cluster represents a set of functionally related genes or proteins [19]. The enrichment score of 5.27 which is a fairly high level of overrepresentation of the terms in cluster. The terms displayed high statistical significance with low p value and Benjamini values. The terms associated with the functional annotation cluster were Carboxypeptidase-like- regulatory domain superfamily, Overlapping homologous superfamilies and Lambda-like tail fiber protein, N-terminal. The Carboxypeptidase-like- regulatory domain superfamily is said to possess regulatory domain within the protein as a β-sandwich, comprising 7 strands in 2 sheets in a greek-key topology [85-88]. 
The other terms- Overlapping homologous superfamilies  and Lambda-like tail fiber protein, N-terminal seem like phage tails but may have other roles [89]. The mRNAs associated with the gene-list for the functional annotation also point towards bacteriophage tail assembly, some enzymatic activity and host pathogen interaction [90],[91]. 

### 1.11.	Putative STnc1220 regulation over ssaK gene in Salmonella typhimurium
sRNA STnc1220 was found to interact with mRNA ssaK having an interaction energy of -56.9503kcal/mol. It is a SPI-2 type III secretion system apparatus protein. The predicted product of the ssaK gene is a hydrophilic protein of 36.5 kDa and predictions made via the Chou–Fasman algorithm describe a helical protein structure, especially in the C-terminal region. However, no transmembrane helices are predicted [92], [93]. It is previously known to us that STnc1220 is a conserved sRNA sequence in Salmonella genus and is associated with pathogenicity islands. It is also known that the sRNA STnc1220 lies antisense to  SPI2 ssaK gene [94]. Thus it can be safe to presume that the interaction results obtained might hint towards some regulatory control of the sRNA towards ssaK gene. 

### 1.12.	sRNA ASdes in Mycobacterium tuberculosis leads to upregulation of DesA1 gene
The sRNA ASdes is known to be complementary to the desA1 gene and is located within it [95]. DesA1 is said to be a Putative acyl-[acyl-carrier-protein] desaturase associated with growth in Mycobacterium tuberculosis [96]. The presence of sRNA ASdes is also reported to be high in plasma of infected TB patients as compared to healthy individuals [97]. This supports the notion that ASdes regulatory function may involve enhancement of the desA1 gene expression and is backed by the interaction values obtained. 

